# Project 3: Weighted Round-Robin Scheduler

#### OS Fall 2016

##### DUE: Monday, 5/23/2016 at 8:59pm KST
##### Design Review DUE: Wednesday, 5/11/2016

In this project, we will build our own CPU scheduler in the Tizen Linux kernel. Then, we test the scheduler with the Tizen device.

1.  <a name="p1"> </a> **(60 pts.) A Symmetric Multiprocessor Weighted Round-Robin Scheduler**

    Add a new scheduling policy to the Linux kernel to support _weighted round-robin_ scheduling. Call this policy __`WRR`__. The algorithm should run in constant time and work as follows:
    
    1.  The new scheduling policy should serve as the default scheduling policy for <span class="icmd">systemd</span> (in Android, <span class="icmd">init</span>) and all of its descendants.
    2.  Multiprocessor systems must be fully supported.
    3.  The base time slice (quantum) should be 10ms. Weights of tasks can range between 1 and 20 (inclusively). A task's time slice is determined by its weight multiplied by the base time slice. The default weight of tasks should be 10 (a 100ms time slice).
    4.  If the weight of a task currently on a CPU is changed, it should finish its time quantum as it was before the weight change (i.e., increasing the weight of a task currently on a CPU does not extend its current time quantum).
    5.  When deciding which CPU a job should be assigned to, it should be assigned to the CPU with the smallest total weight (i.e., sum of the weights of the jobs on the CPU's run queue).
    6.  Periodic load balancing should be implemented such that a single job from the run queue with the highest total weight should be moved to the run queue with the lowest total weight, provided there exists a job in the highest run queue that can be moved to the lowest run queue without causing the lowest run queue's total weight to become greater than or equal to the highest run queue's total weight. The job that should be moved is the highest weighted eligible job which can be moved without causing the weight imbalance to reverse. Jobs that are currently running are not eligible to be moved and some jobs may have restrictions on which CPU they can be run on. Load balancing should be attempted every 2000ms.
    
    *   The Linux scheduler implements individual scheduling classes corresponding to different scheduling policies. For this assignment, you need to create a new scheduling class, <span class="icmd">wrr_sched_class</span>, for the <span class="icmd">WRR</span> policy, and implement the necessary functions in <span class="icmd">kernel/sched/wrr.c</span>. You can find some good examples of how to create a scheduling class in <span class="icmd">kernel/sched/rt.c</span> and <span class="icmd">kernel/sched/fair.c</span>. Other interesting files that will help you understand how the Linux scheduler works are <span class="icmd">kernel/sched/core.c</span>, <span class="icmd">kernel/sched/sched.h</span> and <span class="icmd">include/uapi/linux/sched.h</span>. While there is a fair amount of code in these files, a key goal of this assignment is for you to understand how to abstract the scheduler code so that you learn in detail the parts of the scheduler that are crucial for this assignment and ignore the parts that are not.
    *   Your scheduler should operate alongside the existing Linux scheduler. Therefore, you should add a new scheduling policy, <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span>. The value of <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> should be 6. <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> should be made the default scheduler class of <span class="icmd">systemd</span>. To do it, you may have to modify include/linux/init_task.h.
    *   Only tasks whose policies are set to <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> should be considered for selection by your new scheduler.
    *   Tasks using the <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> policy should take priority over tasks using the <span class="icmd">SCHED_NORMAL</span> policy, but _not_ over tasks using the <span class="icmd">SCHED_RR</span> or <span class="icmd">SCHED_FIFO</span> policies of real time scheduler.
    *   The weight of a task and the <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> scheduling flag should be _inherited_ by the child of any forking task.
    *   Your scheduler must be capable of working on both uniprocessor systems and multiprocessor systems (like the Tizen device). All cores should be utilized on multiprocessor systems.
    *   Proper synchronization and locking is crucial for an SMP scheduler, but not easy. Pay close attention to the kind of locking used in existing kernel schedulers.
    *   If a process' scheduler is set to <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> after previously being set to another scheduler, its weight should be the default weight.
    *   For a more responsive system, you may want to set the scheduler of kernel threads to be <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> as well (otherwise, <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> tasks can starve the <span class="icmd">SCHED_NORMAL</span> tasks to a degree). To do this, you can modify and kernel/kthread.c thus replace <span class="icmd">SCHED_NORMAL</span> with <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span>. You don't have to though, this is not a requirement.
    
    **Setting / Getting Weights**:
    For setting and getting the weights, you are to implement the following system calls:

    <pre>/* Set the SCHED_WRR weight of process, as identified by 'pid'.
     * If 'pid' is 0, set the weight for the calling process.
     * System call number 384.
     */
    int sched_setweight(pid_t pid, int weight);

    /* Obtain the SCHED_WRR weight of a process as identified by 'pid'.
     * If 'pid' is 0, return the weight of the calling process.
     * System call number 385.
    int sched_getweight(pid_t pid);
    </pre>

    Only the administrator (<span class="icmd">root</span> user) or the user who owns the process may adjust a process' weight using <span class="icmd">sched_setweight()</span>. Furthermore, only the administrator may increase a process' weight. Any user should be able to call <span class="icmd">sched_getweight()</span>. It is an error to try and set the weight on a process not using the <span class="icmd">SCHED_WRR</span> policy. The system calls should handle all errors appropriately. The system calls should be implemented in <span class="icmd">kernel/sched.c</span>.

    The system calls refer to the process whose ID is specified by _pid_, i.e., only one task's weight should be changed in the kernel. (In _overly simplistic_ terms, the weight of the task_struct whose pid is specified by _pid_ is changed). Or you can implement it such that the process represented by _pid_ and all of its threads' weights are changed. This implementation is more complicated so there is more potential for it to be implemented incorrectly.
2.  <a name="p1"> </a> **(10 pts.) Investigate**

    Demonstrate that your scheduler works with a test program that calculates the prime factorization of a number using the naive _Trial Division_ method. Track how long this program takes to execute with different weightings set and plot the result. You should choose a number to factor that will take sufficiently long to calculate the prime factorization of, such that it demonstrates the effect of weighting has on its execution time. You can measure the execution time either internally in the program's code or externally so long as it is sufficiently accurate to show the effect of weighting.

    You should provide a complete set of results that show all your tests. If there are any results that do not yield execution time proportional to weights, explain why. Your results and any explanations should be put in the <span class="icmd">README.md</span> file in the project branch of your team's repository. Your plot should be named <span class="icmd">plot.pdf</span> and should be put next to the <span class="icmd">README.md</span> file.

### Important Hints/Tips

**Kernel / Scheduler Hacking:**

*   For this homework the default kernel configurations for the Tizen device has to be updated to include the <span class="icmd">debugfs</span>, and some basic scheduler debugging. These tools can be of great value as you work on this assignment. Debugfs documentation can be found [here](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/filesystems/debugfs.txt), and scheduler debugging information can be found in <span class="icmd">/proc/sched_debug</span> and <span class="icmd">/proc/schedstat</span> respectively.
*   To make use of /proc/sched_debug and /proc/schedstat information, you should firstly enable CONFIG_SCHED_DEBUG and CONFIG_SCHEDSTATS options in arch/arm/configs/tizen_tm1_defconfig. You can modify sched/debug.c and sched/stats.c - you may want to add something while you debug! The debugfs can be mounted with <span class="icmd">mount -t debugfs none /sys/kernel/debug</span> if not already mounted.
*   You may want to refrain from immediately making your scheduler the default scheduler for <span class="icmd">systemd</span> and instead, test by manually configuring tasks to use your policy with <span class="icmd">sched_setscheduler()</span>. Its syscall number is 156.
*   When debugging kernel crashes on the device, once the device reboots after a crash, the kernel log from that crash will exist in <span class="icmd">/proc/last_kmsg</span> (provided it was a soft reboot).

